Okay, we were talking about incorporation, and I
had a question about Bryan. Since Bryan was a major
city, it was possible that you could be annexed.
Did the residents around there not want? Cottage
station residents did not want to be incorporated
in the city of Bryan, and they opposed it, at least
actively and verbally. It never came to the matter
of law. Now, when I started the development of
North Oakwood addition, which we spoke of a while
ago on the north side of the campus, that area, of
course, lay between Bryan and College Station.
And I was sending the property mostly to College
Station people.
And they did not want to be. When I say they, I'm not
trying to speak for all of them. They had a little
division of groups. But College Station would
just get out of the way. They had no tax system, no
system of giving utilities and the usual city
services that you get from towns, like
maintenance of streets and things. Brian did.
They offered to take care of the street
development, install the streets better than I
had, and the utilities, particularly sewer
system. So
I arranged to have a vote. We might have had, oh, I
had 200, 300 lots in there. but probably, oh, maybe
50 people, 50 families, perhaps, lived in there. I
just called them together and took a vote where
they wanted to make an application to come in the
city, College Station city limits or Bryan. And
they voted unanimously for Bryan because, yeah.
See, Texas Avenue was a dirt road at that time, and
they was building about an 8 or 10-inch water main
from the city limits clearing on the outskirts.
out along this barbecue place, Landy Sims
Barbecue. So they voted for that and we went into
that system then. And of course I promoted it as
best I could because that way we had this
out-of-town tax system again. And
It was getting hard to handle. Had to take care of
that. Now there's a young heroic man by the name of
Jim Astin. Oh, yes. City manager? Huh? City
manager of Bryan? Yeah. He was city manager of
Bryan. Very aggressive young man and brilliant,
smart man. He was president of the Republic Bank in
Dallas, which is the only Republic Bank here. Oh, I
didn't know that. Yeah. He was a great athlete out
of A&M, a little after my time. I was 29, he was about
33. But, see, I owned the utility lines. I owned the
streets. I hadn't even dedicated them to the
public. I owned, that is, Oakwood Rent-A-Cup,
because my own Oakwood Rent-A-Cup. So he
propositioned me to buy those utility lines.
Well, I said, doggone anxious to get rid of them.
And I'd have probably given them to him if he had
asked me. But he paid me $30,000 or $40,000. Oh,
really? Which would be $300,000 or $400,000 now.
Oh. That's what inflation is then. And of course,
that made it possible for me to do other things out
there that I'd been wanting to do. So then, by that
time, then I dedicated the streets to the public.
So the public owned the streets, like county roads
and streets and cities and such. And it's after
that that the residents decided to ask to be
annexed into Bryan? Yes. OK. Well, what about the
residents around College Station, around the A&M
campus? Why didn't they want to be annexed to
Bryan? Was there any? Oh,
I hardly know the word to use. Not necessarily
stubbornness. They just wanted their own town.
They wanted their own town. They just wanted their
own town. And they'd always lived outside of
Bryan. They didn't want to be any part of Bryan, and
still don't. Yeah, that's right. If you want to get
yourself in a terrible row, you can go out here and
start making speeches. Let's join Bryan. Either
chambers of commerce. Maybe you read lately. Now,
see, we had two separate chambers of commerce for a
long time. But after the war, I guess World War II,
they joined the two chambers together. and have
one, Bryan College Station. But now there's some
agitation for Bryan College Station to have its
own chamber of commerce. I don't like that. I don't
see it either. Well, they have different offices,
don't they? Oh, yeah. But they're one. So
basically, they just wanted their own town, felt
like they could best provide for their own needs.
Well, you were living in College Station at that
time? I've always lived in College Station. Were
you in favor of incorporation then? Were you in
Negroes? College Station? Yes, indeed. I
certainly was, yeah. I promoted every way I could,
except as being an officer. I never was a
councilman or mayor or anything like that. But I
certainly used what little influence I had to
promote the city of College Station. The
cemetery, for example. I promoted that cemetery.
You were president of the cemetery. Yeah. Well, I
owned the land. I owned the land at one time. Well,
can you tell me about that? Well, yeah.
I was real active in business enterprises, well,
from the middle 30s on. The war developed, as I was
telling you, on the south side when the Japs raided
Barrel Harbor. I knew I was going to have to go in the
war, because I had a commission as a reserve
officer. I was first lieutenant in infantry. So
right at the beginning of that dark Sunday day, I
began to make plans to be called. And I was. And I
went in April of 42, just two or three months later.
Well, we didn't have anything out in Amabank. Just
didn't have any facilities at all. And we needed a
bank, needed a bank. And I was the principal,
because I had this construction going on down
there. And I'd average, make one trip a day, at
least, to Bryan Bank. And of course, get my payroll
over there on Fridays. And I had done a little work
on the bank.
I got a good deal of discouragement from that, but
then I was caught up and forgot about it when I spent
about two and a half years in Europe during the war
while I was in the Air Corps in a heavy bombardment
outfit. And I used to ride home to my wife and some
other friends and tell them the things we had to do
when the war was over. If you got back. And my first
priority was that bank. That was the bank, which is
the University of Nashville now. That was the
first priority. And the second was a hotel or
something. We didn't have, we had the Blue Bonnet
Motel over at the East Gate, little wooden shacks,
about eight or ten of them, called the Blue Bonnet.
And that's the only facilities we had for
overnight people. Had the LaSalle Hotel and
Bride, you know, and then we didn't have a
cemetery. And I, during my experience, had come up
that we needed a cemetery out there. We had to go to
Barron Brothers County, had to be in Bryan, you
know. A lot of people came to Illinois and other
states, they'd ship the bodies back there to
Barron. Those were my, well, those were my first
three priorities. Another one we had to have was a
hardware store. I was in the building business and
I had to go to get a pound of nails. Everything that I
eat, I had to go to Brian. I was wearing a Rhodes hat.
Well, when the war ended, I wrote to 50 people or
something like that to have a meeting on the bank.
We had the meeting. And not the charter for the
bank. We measured from May the 1st, 1946. I got in
October of 45.
Then,
now as for the hotel, the student center, I joined
with a former student, and we created and raised
the money for the student center. And it had, oh,
say, 100 rooms in it for a guest, you know, for a
hotel. And I never could conceive of never needing
any more rooms than that. So that took care of that.
So you were...
Goodbye, honey. Bye-bye. See you tomorrow. Nice
to meet you. You were involved in the student
center meeting? And through the former student
association, I was active with the former
students, not individually. I mean, don't say
that you couldn't say that I helped create it. I
worked with the students to raise the money to get
it done. And that solved that problem. Then my next
one was the cemetery. You know where it is. Right.
I got a little committee together. including Mr.
F.W. Hensel, who was an architect, a landscape
architect, and went down and bought the lands from
50 acres by Mr. Gorisky.
And that's where the cemetery is. G-O-R-I-S-K-Y,
something like Gorisky.
And that's where the cemetery is now. Now, I had the
cooperation... from the university, at least
through President Gilchrist. He was president of
the university at that time, and he was very eager
to have a cemetery out here. And I got some ideas
from him. I was going to lay it off in sections, one
for presidents, a little section where only
presidents would be buried. And perhaps you
didn't know that down across the railroad track
You know what's called a hard liquor track? Right
across from it, there's a cemetery over there with
one prison buried in it. Who was that? I can't say
his name. But you've got a little tombstone down
there with this marker. It's still down there?
Yeah. Because I read that they had tried to make
arrangements to move all the bodies down there to
the cemetery. Did they not ever, did that ever...
They never did do that. They were going to when
they... When they built the dormitories, number
what, dormitory 20 or 30 or 40 or whatever the
numbers are, you know where they are. Over there on
the, by the drill
field. There's two or three graves there, and they
moved them. And they moved them down there to this
place I'm talking about. I don't think there's any
presence in them. There was a grave by the drill
field that's on Canyon Campus? Yes. That's at
Westgate? Is it at Westgate, the drill field? Is it
at Westgate? Is it what, honey? At Westgate. Oh,
no. No, it's a, let me see. Well, you know where the
president's home is. Yes. That cross toward me.
The Texas Avenue? The big open space? That's
where... Where the mess hall? Right. The graves
used to be there? Yeah. Okay. And they moved them to
across the railroad tracks. Right. Uh-huh.
Wasn't but two or three. But the present now, how
his grave ever got over, I never found out. But I
thought it was pitiful that him to be over there.
And nobody knew anything about it. And I ran an ad in
the Texas Aggie that anybody knew any of the
relatives of this present that I described before
he was, and he was over there alone by himself, and
kind of pitiful and not like to move his body, and we
had to go through some law to get him to move a body.
And I finally found a distant relative in Abilene,
and had some correspondence with him, but he
faded. I don't know whatever happened. But
anyway, that's when we got the cemetery, that Mr.
Gilchrist was ready for it. But when we took it up to
the city of Cotton Station, I said, I'm going to
have a private cemetery, develop it myself, sell
the cemetery lots, which is common. A lot of the
better cemeteries are that way. But the city of
Cotton Station bust up. They wouldn't go in on it.
So I said, well, do you want the cemetery? Yes, we
do. So I sold them the land. And that's where the
cemetery is now. Oh, I see. That was my second
priority. And weren't you on the cemetery
committee that decided? Well, locating it, I
didn't have anything to do with designing the lots
and laying out the rules and regulations in that
cemetery. Do you remember, I had heard something
to the extent of on that land, it's a huge tract, And
then part of it was already... There's a little
place in there. Perhaps an acre. That land belongs
to this family whose name I gave you. I don't know
from how long, way back in 1875 or something like
that. Their religion was Methodist. And they gave
the... National Methodist Association, the
whole thing, not just the local Methodist. An acre
or two acres, whatever's in there, and it's still
there. Those old markers are still in there. Is
that what they refer to as Old Shiloh Cemetery?
That's right. Is that just that acre? Or, okay, I
was curious. It had steel fence around it. I
haven't been down there lately to see if that steel
fence is still there. But they still own that. Oh,
it doesn't belong to the city? No. Oh, I thought it
did, but it belongs to the Methodist Church. To the
Methodist Church. That's interesting. Yeah.
Okay. I was going to ask some more questions about
incorporation. You were in favor of it, and do you
remember who pushed the hardest for
incorporation? Do you remember the meetings?
Well, probably. I can't probably... Mr. Ernest
Langford was one. Mr. Ernest Langford was a mayor
for, oh, quite long. I don't know how long. But he
was head of the architecture department. Mr.
Hensel, F.W. Hensel, he was a landscape
architect, a wonderful gentleman, a great friend
of mine. We worked together on the city. Did he help
your, I had read that he had helped College Park,
had helped kind of landscape College Park. Did he
do that for Oakwood, or? No, I didn't use it on
Oakwood. North Oakwood, he designed it, laid it
out in lots and lots, but we didn't have to actually
do any architecture, decoration, and things like
that. But he worked on the College Station
Cemetery. Oh, that's right. Yeah, he worked on
that. A man named Joe Orr, who was a civil engineer,
he probably surveyed it out, put those postmarks,
you know, around the corner. That's right. I read
that he did that. the only one that comes to me right
now. But we got the cemetery and the bank and the
hotel
and finally got a hardware store out there. What
hardware? It was called Lloyd Smith Hardware at
the time. It's over there at the North Gate. You
know where the Baptist Church is? The building
right across the street from the Baptist Church.
It was a brick building. That's where we put Lloyd
Smith in the hardware business. I got it financed
for him through my connections. And that was so
probably 19... He was there before the war, about
1941 or two, something like that. No, I mean after
the war, right after the war. And then I kind of put
myself and my own business in, operating the
thing. Got the bank going, as I told you, and it went
broke. Oh, okay. I want to ask you about the bank,
but let's see. Before I do... You were talking
about your building at Southside. Was it called
Burgess Building? It's referred to that. Yes,
uh-huh. Did you lease part of it to the city as city
offices? Yes, you're sure right. Mr. Colonel
Anderson mentioned that this morning when I
talked to him. See, they leased. The city of
College Station had one office up there. I had
operated three offices, and the city had one. Oh, I
see. I had my own little private office in an
architecture. Art Tech had an office. And then we
had an insurance office up there, too. And how long
did they rent the city out? Well, the city left
there pretty soon after World War II. They built a
property over on the north side, down by the
railroad track. Uh-huh. The first city office?
Yeah. They built their own property down there and
moved out down there about War was over in 45,
probably in 47 or something like that they moved
out. Apparently they were at Northgate, in an
office at Northgate, and then they moved into your
building? Yes, they had a little, just one little
room there at the Northgate.
I don't remember how much it was, but I built that
building there on the south side. They moved down
there, and they were there five, six years. Okay,
and then they moved into their offices. Yeah. And
you were telling me earlier about College
Station, then when they incorporated, they
bought the lines, your utility, your sewer, your
water, your... Right. They bought them from the
developer themselves? Well, from the open-ready
company that owned them. Yeah, I put those
utilities in there. And was this the case for all of
the divisions that were... Well,
there really wasn't one at that time, not just me.
At that time, when I bought those lots from College
Park, then I got the whole business. And our
tourist disposal plant ran out across Well, we had
a disposal bed, not very far from where the present
high school, College Station High School is. Way
off down there, you know. Oh, the present one.
Yeah. Okay. We had a disposal system down there.
And the city bought all of that from you? Yeah.
Uh-huh. Put it in their own system. Now they carry
it way on down across Highway 6. Way off down there.
That's what the... That's where the present
disposal system is, way off down there. Highway 6
says you're going out of town, or Highway 6 says
you're going out of town? Yeah, it goes in that
facility. Oh, I'll have to look for it. Can you see
it on the side of the road? Oh, no, honey, it's way
off down in the sticks. Okay. Well, after the city
became incorporated, how adequate were the
services? I mean, did you feel like there was an
increase? Oh, yeah. As far as fire? Sure, yeah.
Well, they just had people that would do the job. I
didn't have anybody employed except a garbage man
to pick up. If we had electrical trouble, I had to
hire a private electrician to go down there and do
whatever was necessary. And the electric
company, of course, was getting that from A&M,
too. They installed the poles and the wiring and
made the inspections and such as that.
That the city did that, you're saying? When the
city was organizing, they took over all that. They
took over that. How about the schools? Did you feel
like, do you have children? Yes. Did you feel like
the schools provided education? Yes, they had
excellent schools, high schools. In fact, we
always felt, it might have been a little jealousy
or something, we felt our educational services
for children exceeded Brian's because I had many
teachers. Most of the teachers were husbands and
wives of the college staff. They were highly
trained, you know. And
what about the upkeep of roads? Well, when the city
organized it, of course they took over the upkeep
of the roads. Before the city, we just had to do it as
it needed, yeah. And so you felt like it improved?
Oh yes, it greatly improved. Did you feel like the
council was responsible, responsive to the needs
of the citizens? Yes, the council, we've always
had a very fine council in this city. They were
politicians, you know. It's like any other
politician, but they were educated people, and
they were devoted to their job, and they wanted to
do what they're supposed to do to maintain the
comfort and ease and the peace of getting around. I
think the College Station area has been
particularly fortunate in having that kind of
people to serve as the mayors and councilmen, as we
do today. Very high class people. Do you feel like
they've shown, in the past, they've shown a lot of
foresight as far as planning? Absolutely. They
sure have. Yeah. You mentioned Colonel Anderson
before, and so I was going to ask you, some
information you are friends with Mr. Anderson oh
yeah he's one of my most beloved old gentlemen he's
a track coach one of the athletic coaches here he's
a fine athlete himself from Mississippi came here
about with Mr. D.X. Bible about 1919 after World
War I he was an officer in World War I And he got the
title of colonel in World War I? Well,
I think he was a captain or maybe a major when he came
out of the service, but he stayed in the reserves
and was promoted to colonel. And he was called back
in duty in World War II, but he didn't stay very
long. He was asked to be relieved, getting old. I
think he's 90 and 91 now. Oh, he is. Oh, my heavens. I
want to give you his number if you don't mind,
Judge. Do you have his number anywhere? No,
sir. Telephone number.
And
he's awful proud of being married one time. That's
what I'd like to talk to him about. He didn't
believe in taxes. Don't you dare say Mr. Burgess
said you didn't believe in taxes. Don't say that.
But when he was married, he didn't want any taxes.
Not even property
taxes? No. I've kidded him about this many times.
He can take it. I'm kind of kidding you. But he lived
down there on Fairview Street. Mm-hmm. bought a
house from the college and moved it down there. And
I sold him the property. And those were dirt
streets, gravel top, you know. And a little hole
developed out there, probably as big as an
ordinary wash tub. Not that deep, of course, but
water stood in it for days and days. And some
smart-aleck people down there put a little sign up
there. No fishing allowed by order of Colonel
Anderson. And he saw that, and he had no real
automobile, and you wouldn't know about that
either. And a two-wheel trailer, he was going
behind it. He went out somewhere and drove right
up, and that thing fell to the ground and fell in his
fishing hole. They took his sign down. I'll kid you
about that. Oh, how funny. That is funny. We talked
earlier about zoning, and apparently zoning has
always been very important in college stations.
Yes, right from the very beginning. Did you like
that idea of zoning, and why? Well, because you
could control the type of house and what was to be
done to it. My addition, the Oakwood addition, was
the first area between Dallas And I got that from
the FHA, this man, I tell you that. You had to, as a
residential area, that's what it was. We not only
controlled by a contract, I'd give you a deed to the
property, and that kind of contract, what you
could do with that property. You had to build a
house so many feet from the sideline, so many feet
from the front line, and it had to be certain square
feet of area, say a minimum of 1,200 square feet.
That's just an ordinary, a very ordinary two or
three bedroom house. See? It controlled the size
of the house and architectural design. and where
it'd be located on the lot. You couldn't go closer
than 30 feet to the street line. Meet sidelines, I
remember 12 feet, meet sidelines. So it makes the
area look nicer. Well, yeah. Well, Bryan has never
adopted zoning. They have no zoning. Do you know
why they didn't adopt zoning? Well, they just
never did when they organized the town way back
there. Now, there's certain additions to the city
of Bryan. For example, my North Oakwood addition
is in the city of Bryan, but it's highly zoned. It's
highly zoned. A lot more than the South Oakwood
addition is. And of course, that helps sell that
thing. It helps sell it. Because people know
they're going to have homes. You couldn't have an
automobile shop next door to you or something
else. It had to be a single family residence. But
just because Bryan was started earlier in the
history that it was really never adopted? Yeah,
Rydler started about 1800 and what, 40? 40.
Somewhere in the 40s. Very old. And they never
dreamed of zoning. They never had it in their mind.
You call a peace property, you do what you want to
with it. And of course, we had a little trouble with
that, especially in North Oakwood, on rooming
houses and one thing or another. One doctor was
going to sue me. And I invite him to. Let's see if
these things any good. Let's do it on a friendly
basis. You just sue me, and we'll see how we come
out. Well, of course, by that time, Zoni had become
very popular, and it was popular out there. A lot of
people bought it from me out there because it was
on. Excuse me. I don't remember where we were on the
bank. I substantially organized that by letters
to friends who were overseas during the war. I was
in Europe. And when I came home, I got home in
October of 45. I might say I just hit the ground
running. And we obtained a charter. We had some
opposition
in getting a charter from other banks in the area.
Uh-huh. We didn't have an institution out here at
all, any banking institution at all. Had to go to
buying. And it was an awful nuisance, as much as we
were doing. So we got a bank, called it the College
Station State Bank, and capitalized it. But we
couldn't get any building material because it had
to have priorities from the veterans coming home
from service. Everything you'd have to get a... I
had a word for it, I can't say it. But you'd get a
little form for building material. And some of it
wasn't available at all, except to a veteran. And
we were able to get a little... hut that was 16 feet,
well, not very much bigger than this hall office
right here. This looks like it may be 12 by 12 or
something. We got two of them, put them together,
and made 16 by 32. It was a plywood building. We
could almost cut it up with a knife. That was our
first bank site. We opened the bank and started
business. Where was the umpane? It was over there
on Jersey Street at the North Gate. Excuse me. I
think the Presbyterian owned that building
there. And I forget what it's called. It's a solid
concrete building. You know where Wyatt's, what
is that little concrete building next to Wyatt's?
That bookstore there, sporting goods store,
whatever it is. That was the building. That was the
bank until we bid it where it is now. It's a
university national now. We changed from a state
bank to a national bank.
I was one of the originators of the bank, served on
its original board, and was the vice president and
executive officer. The bank went broke. I had a man
in there running it that had been on the examining
course. And I thought it was awful lucky to be able
to get him.
But he just didn't have what it takes to make a
banker, couldn't control his loans, and lost all
of our capital. And we had to reorganize the bank.
And I was one of the principal organizers.
the commissioner wouldn't let the man we had
running it come back in there at all. And I never had
the bank experience, but they wouldn't let
anybody else run except me. So I went in and
operated the bank about, oh, eight months or a year
myself and rebuilt it, reassessed our
stockholders for some money to rebuild the
capital. And this was University National?
Shortly after that, we changed it from a state bank
to a national bank, and we called it the University
National. And we got the bank back on its feet, and
it's been doing very well since then. That's
wonderful. Do you remember the man's name? Lamar
Fly. Oh, yeah, I've heard that. Yes, Lamar Fly was a
wonderful fellow. He grew up in a bank in Houston.
It was a whole state bank, I believe they called it.
Anyway, his father ran the bank. He just grew up in
it. Got a banking degree from Texas University and
was an examiner, National Examining Force. And I
thought we was awful lucky to get him. And it was. He
knew what he was doing, but he just didn't have any
intestinal fortitude to talk to people. Right, it
takes that. They could just do him any way they
wanted to, and they found that out pretty quick. He
lost the capital of the bank, of course, and that
just ruined us. What year was it that you had to
reorganize? 1940. 1948. 1948. I
read that you were the president of the Chamber of
Commerce in its early years, is that right? Yes,
they had a local Chamber of Commerce out here. and I
was the president of it. Was Bryan and
Constitution one chamber of commerce then? No.
No, they were two. That's when they separated. I
was also a vice-president of the Bryan Chamber.
I'd been a chamber of commerce man all my business
life.
Do you like the fact that it is bringing in
industry?
Well, I'd have to say I do, being a businessman. I'm
getting up to an age where I like peace and quiet.
But I know that we've got to prepare for the future
of this community, for the future people in it. And
I believe that College Station and Brasses County
as a whole is really on a boom. And I think it's going
to hold. Do you like the way that the character of
the town has changed? Do you see the character of
the town changing? Well, I can't say that I really
like it, but if you ask me why, I couldn't answer
that. I wouldn't want to try to make any move. For
example, Bryan, as you know, the town of Bryan, the
main street, is dead. Oh, yeah. And that's kind of
sad. But it's brought it on itself. We just got to
give in to progress. These little malls that
scattered around, they're so new to us, to me, that
I can't conceive of them really continuing on an
exciting success. You've got little stores
scattered around here, and another mile or two,
another batch of stores, you know? Right. Oh, I
agree. I don't see how it could go, but it is. It
seems every time somebody starts one, it fills up
with business houses. As far as the people are
concerned, was it more of a tight-knit group in the
early days because of its size? No, I don't think
it's any particular group. I think that the times
just sort of developed itself. It just naturally
developed. A person would go out here, and this
land for development purposes, awfully high,
high priced. Then you've got the expense of
development, subdividing it into lots and
blocks. Given ordinary residential section,
say, of 100 acres, probably at least 20 acres will
be in streets where you can't sell. You have to give
it away. Well, of course, the other property, you
could put lots in there. Those lots carry the cost
of the property that you're giving away. And it's
expensive. When a man goes to buy a lot to build on,
it's high. High priced. But then the big money in
the land is the commercial development of it. If
it's located where it can have a store or two, a
little shopping center, they can get several
times the price per square foot on commercial
property than they can get for residential
property. So that encourages the developer to to
develop a little commercial site wherever he is. I
did that way back there. My first one was on the
south side that we spoke of a while ago. when I had to
get ahead of the city of College Station. I didn't
really know what I was doing, but I knew that the
best way for me to come out on that property was to
sell the commercial property at a high price.
Right, that's right. And it's still working that
way. You see the town going in that direction more,
more in a commercial area? Yeah. Because it's more
profitable. That's right, yes. Well, I
appreciate this very much.